We know why people die in general-they get sick, their bodies fail, and they can no longer sustain themselves. But there are patterns to death-and with this visualization, we hope to be able to answer this question, which allows users to see and interact with the data by comparing the different distributions for patient information like BMI, days spent in ICU, platelet count by survival as well. 

## Design Rationale

Our design philosophy around this visualization was not to necessarily send a message but to portray just the truth as effectively as possible. There are many takeaways from this visualization, any major takeaway should not be misleading-for example, one shouldn’t conclude that more days spent in the icu is the reason for why people die-it should be very obvious that the average amount of days spent in the icu is much higher for the death group is because of a few very high outliers and a smaller sample size. 

Because there were a lot of columns in the category that heavily influenced mortality, we had to choose our columns carefully. First of all, we had to choose on either categorical or numerical columns-if we did one, we couldn’t do the other, because having 2 different formats of graphs(bar and scatter, or histogram and strip plot, etc.) would be too confusing for audiences. We ended up choosing numerical values because of the diversity of the relevant columns-most of the categorical columns had to do with either 1. Anesthesia or 2. The disease they had. 

To choose our relevant columns, we measured the ones with a decently high correlation to death in hospitals. This threshold was arbitrary to some extent-the highest correlation was icu_days at about 0.2, so we chose columns where the r value was between 0.1 and 0.2. We also made sure to choose information that non medical practitioners would have an idea of-for example, Preoperative HCO3- is not something most people know but actually was decently well correlated with mortality, so we did not include it. (I searched it up-it’s bicarbonate, and presence in a human body means how well balanced the base/acids in your blood is). 

During our exploratory EDA, our graphs usually came up as either box plots or histograms-but it’s very hard to fit more than 1 of these on a page-and we wanted people to compare multiple columns at a time, so we needed a graph where you could easily fit at least 3 on a page without overwhelming people. That’s why we settled on the wonderful strip plot-it looks very clean, depicts data with a really low and clean data to ink ratio, and having 3 on the same page is no problem. 

To make the different columns share the same y axis, we had to standardize each and every category. In order to make sure the original data wasn’t lost, we implemented a tooltip that still shows the non-normalized data when a point is hovered over.

## Development Process

We mainly relied on D3(as per the guidelines) to implement our visualizations, but in order to standardize our data and to do data cleaning, we used Python. 

I(kevin) took care of all writeups, videos, and github stuff(pulling/merge requests/deployment), the column selector, the axis labels, titles, the density of the dot colors, Jayden implemented the group by menu of dead/alive, the tooltip and hover effect, the normalization and querying of the data, Max took care of the legend, the visual themes and CSS styling, the dots depicting the averages for each group. However, these tasks weren’t split up super strictly-we all worked on the same files and everyone knows exactly what each line of code does, and when someone struggled on something, we would each help them with it. Overall, this project took about 25 ish hours between all 3 of us-it’s fair to say that each of us spent about 8 or 9 hours on this thing. 

The most time consuming thing for us was probably fundamentally changing our code to accommodate more than 3 columns and to make that an interaction halfway through. Essentially it forced us to change all our functions to take in parameters for the column names, but we didn’t want to implement OOP and wanted to keep it in 1 file. This led to some pretty gnarly restructuring of the code but we fixed it and it’s a huge upgrade allowing users to see information from multiple columns, and it means that technically, our users can see 3(5c1+5c2+5c3) different combinations of graphs(they can see 1 graph, 2 graphs, 3 graphs, out of 5 different columns, for dead, alive, or both).

The next most time consuming thing was probably reducing latency-when we ran the site on my computer(I have an old machine) the site would take a long time to load. This meant going back to the code and restructuring the logic so that it would be more efficient-eg cutting out attributes associated with each dot for the tooltip and implementing it another way. 
